

                                                             P. Estrela 
   Internet Draft                                               A.Grilo 
                                                               T. Vazƒo 
                                                               M. Nunes 
   Document: draft-estrela-timip-00.txt                           INESC 
   Expires: September 2002                                   March 2002 
 
 
                  Terminal Independent Mobile IP (TIMIP) 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance 
   with all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026. 
    
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that      
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   IP mobility protocols usually assume that the mobile nodes have a 
   mobility-aware IP stack, which is still a scenario that can seldom 
   be found nowadays. Most terminals, including laptops and PDAs, still 
   use legacy IP stacks, limiting their use to layer-2 mobility between 
   Access Points (APs) connected to the same Access Router (AR) within 
   a single IP subnet. This document presents Terminal Independent 
   Mobile IP (TIMIP), which supports IP mobility of mobility-unaware 
   mobile nodes with legacy IP stacks, while fully interoperating with 
   Mobile IP to provide macromobility across IP subnets. 
 
 









     
   Estrela                                                           1 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
Table of Contents 
    
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................1 
   1. Introduction....................................................2 
     1.1 Applicability................................................2 
   2. Terminology.....................................................3 
   3. Architecture....................................................3 
   4. Registration....................................................4 
   5. Power-up........................................................5 
   6. Micromobility...................................................7 
   7. Macromobility...................................................8 
     7.1. Macromobility for LMNs......................................8 
     7.2. Macromobility for MIP terminals.............................9 
   8. References.....................................................10 
   9. Author's Addresses.............................................10 
 
1. Introduction 
    
   TIMIP [1] is a micromobility architecture that allows Mobile Nodes 
   with legacy IP stacks to roam within an IP subnet. Macromobility, 
   i.e. mobility across subnet boundaries, still relies on Mobile IP 
   [2]. The main features of TIMIP are listed below, some of them being 
   already present in other micromobility architectures, namely CIP [3] 
   or HAWAII [4]: 
    
   - TIMIP does not require changes to the IP protocol stack of mobile 
     nodes, either for micromobility or macromobility. 
   - Refreshing of routing paths is performed by data packets sent by 
     the mobile terminals, with signaling being employed only when no 
     traffic is detected at the routers for a certain time interval 
     (CIP). 
   - Routing reconfiguration during handoff within a TIMIP domain only 
     needs to change the routing tables of the Access Routers located 
     in the shortest path between the New Access Point and the Old 
     Access Point (HAWAII). 
   - Routing of data packets within a TIMIP domain does not need to 
     reach the Access Network Gateway, involving only the Access 
     Routers located in the shortest path between the sender and the 
     receiver (HAWAII). 
    
1.1 Applicability 
    
   TIMIP is applicable within LANs, and possibly larger corporate networks that 
   form one subnet only. To provide mobility between subnets 
   (macromobility), Mobile IP [2] should be supported in the Access 
   Network Gateway of the TIMIP domain. 
    
   It is assumed that the data link layer of the Access Points is able 
   to perform terminal power-up detection and to notify the TIMIP 
   layer. 
    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 2] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
    
   It is also assumed that the Access Routers of the TIMIP domain form 
   a logical tree, with the Access Network Gateway located at the top. 
    
2. Terminology 
    
   Access Network 
   An IP network that includes one or more Access Routers and a Access 
   Network Gateway. 
    
   Access Network Gateway (ANG) 
   An Access Router that separates the Access Network from a third 
   party network. 
    
   Access Point (AP) 
   An Access Router that offers layer-2 connectivity to Mobile Nodes. 
    
   Access Router (AR) 
   An IP router residing in an Access Network and connected to one or 
   more access points. An AR offers connectivity to Mobile Nodes. The 
   router may include intelligence beyond simple forwarding service 
   offered by ordinary IP routers. Some Access Routers can be Access 
   Points. 
    
   Legacy Mobile Node (LMN) 
   A Mobile Node whose IP layer is not aware of mobility.  
    
   Mobile Node (MN) 
   An IP end-node capable of changing its point of attachment to the 
   network. 
    
   Subnet 
   A range of IP address designed by a common prefix. 
    
3. Architecture 
    
   A TIMIP domain is an IP subnet organized as a logical tree of Access 
   Routers (ARs) whose root router is the Access Network Gateway (ANG). 
   The Access Routers are also layer-2 Access Points (APs), which 
   interface directly with the MNs through the wireless medium (WM). 
   The architectural diagram of TIMIP is depicted in Figure 1. 
    











    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 3] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
                 |       +-+        +-----+                   +-----+  
                [] <-->  | | -------| AR5 |-------------------|     |  
                MN       +-+       /+-----+                  /| ANG |- 
                       AP/AR1     /                         / |     |  
                                 /                         /  +-----+  
                         +-+    /                         /            
                         | |----                         /             
                         +-+                            /              
                       AP/AR2                          /               
                                                      /                
                         +-+        +-----+          /                 
                         | |--------| AR6 |----------                  
                         +-+       /+-----+                            
                       AP/AR3     / 
                                 / 
                         +-+    / 
                         | |---- 
                         +-+   
                       AP/AR4 
    
            Figure 1: Architectural Diagram of a TIMIP domain. 
    
   As a Legacy Mobile Node (LMN) has a legacy IP stack and cannot issue 
   any signaling during handoff, handoff detection by the AR relies on 
   notification from layer-2. This notification triggers routing 
   reconfiguration of the TIMIP domain, leading to routing table 
   updating at the ARs. 
    
4. Registration 
    
   In order to allow attachment of an MN to a TIMIP domain, the MN must 
   be previously registered at the ANG. This is accomplished offline 
   through management procedures. For each MN recognized in a TIMIP 
   domain, registration information consists on the following: 
    
   - MAC address of the MN; 
   - IP Address of the MN; 
   - MIP capability; 
   - IP address of the MIP Home Agent; 
   - Authentication Key; 
   - Authentication option. 
    
   The MIP capability parameter specifies if MIP is required, either 
   implemented at the ANG on behalf of legacy terminal (surrogate MIP) 
   or implemented at the terminal itself. If the terminal has a legacy 
   IP protocol stack, the next two parameters specify respectively the 
   IP address of its Home Agent and the authentication key to be used 
   between the terminal and the ANG when the authentication option is 
   turned on. It should be noted that TIMIP authentication is mandatory 
   for macromobility scenarios for both MIP and legacy terminals. The 
   IP address of the Home Agent is not used when the terminal 
   implements MIP, as the terminal itself is responsible for 
   registering with the Home Agent, bypassing the ANG. 
    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 4] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
    
   Once this data is configured at the ANG, it is forwarded to the APs 
   (except the authentication key) so that they are able to know the IP 
   address of newly associated terminals based on their MAC address 
   provided by layer-2 as explained below. 
    
5. Power-up 
    
   When a terminal firstly appears in a TIMIP domain, a routing path is 
   created along the hierarchy of ARs. Consider the scenario in Figure 
   1. When the MN attaches itself to AR1, the creation of the routing 
   path takes the following steps: 
    
   1. The MT performs a layer-2 association with an AP that belongs to 
      the local TIMIP domain. 
    
   2. At the AP, layer-2 notifies the IP layer about the presence of 
      the MT in its wireless interface, triggering the routing 
      reconfiguration procedure. Layer-2 sends the MAC address of the 
      terminal to the IP layer. The MAC address is matched against the 
      terminal registration information broadcasted by the ANG and the 
      respective IP address is found. As the New AP has currently no 
      routing table entry for the MT, the routing table is updated with 
      the addition of this new entry. 
    
   3. The New AP sends a RoutingUpdate message up to the AR at 
      hierarchical level 2. This AR acknowledges with a 
      RoutingUpdateAck message, and updates its routing table 
      accordingly with the addition of a new entry relative to the MT. 
      This entry points to the source of the RoutingUpdate message (in 
      this case the AP) in order to specify the path through which the 
      terminal can be reached. 
    
   4. Exchange of RoutingUpdate/RoutingUpdateAck messages climbs up the 
      hierarchy levels. At each level, the routing table is updated 
      with the creation of a new entry relative to the MT. This entry 
      always points to the source of the RoutingUpdate message in order 
      to specify the path through which the MT can be reached. 
 
   5. Exchange of RoutingUpdate/RoutingUpdateAck messages reaches the 
      ANG, completing the creation of the new routing path. 
    
   The MT is now reachable through the routing path established by the 
   above procedures. The ARs that do not belong to this path have no 
   routing entry for the MT. At these ARs, all packets destined to the 
   MT are forwarded up the hierarchy of routers by default. All packets 
   that arrive at an AR whose routing table has an entry to the 
   destination, are forwarded down the hierarchy of routers until they 
   reach the radio interface in which the MT is located. Packets 
   destined to a terminal located in the same TIMIP domain as the 
   source, only in the worst case reach the ANG. 
    

    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 5] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
   The RoutingUpdate and RoutingUpdateAck messages include a timestamp 
   generated at the New AP. As in TIMIP all APs are synchronized by 
   means of the Network Time Protocol (NTP) [5], this guarantees 
   consistency even when the MT moves faster than the route 
   reconfiguration. 
    
   It should also be noted that the routing path is soft-state and 
   after its establishment, it is refreshed by the data packets sent by 
   the MT. Nevertheless, as the packets are routed within the TIMIP 
   domain, some of the ARs may not be refreshed. When this occurs, the 
   routing entry for the MT becomes invalid after a predefined timeout 
   (e.g. 10s). The AR where the timer expired starts to send ICMP 
   EchoRequest messages to the terminal, filling the source address 
   field of the IP header with the IP address of the ANG. This forces 
   the MT to reply with EchoReply messages destined to the ANG, which 
   will refresh all the routing path within the TIMIP domain. If the MT 
   does not reply within a predefined timeout (e.g. 60s), the routing 
   entry for the MT is removed. 
    
   This basic TIMIP configuration is adequate to have micromobility in 
   wireless access networks where security is not an issue. 
   Nevertheless, just like in other unprotected IP networks, it allows 
   MTs to power-on with false MAC and IP addresses. In order to avoid 
   this, a minimal security functionality must be implemented at the MT 
   itself. However, this can be done in the application layer with no 
   need to change the IP protocol stack. When the authentication option 
   is turned on, it is assumed that the MT runs a special security 
   application, which uses a database of authentication keys for the 
   different TIMIP domains in which the MT is allowed to power-up. This 
   database is indexed by the IP addresses of the ANGs that are the 
   root of the respective networks. 
    
   The authentication takes place in step 2 of the power-on procedure, 
   immediately after layer-2 notifies the IP layer of the AP about the 
   association of the MT. The AP sends an SignatureRequest message to a 
   well known UDP port in the MT. This message carries <IP address of 
   the MT, IP address of the ANG, rand, timestamp>, where rand is a 
   random value and the timestamp is an NTP formatted 64-bit value. The 
   same message is sent to the ANG. Both the MT and the ANG answer the 
   AP with a SignatureReply message containing the same fields present 
   in the SignatureRequest message, plus its 128-bit MD5 message digest 
   [6] calculated with the authentication key of the MT for this 
   network. The latter is only known by the MT (based on the 
   authentication key database and the IP address of the ANG) and the 
   ANG (based on the registration information). The AP compares the 
   signatures of the two SignatureReply messages, and proceeds with the 
   routing reconfiguration procedures in case there is a match. 
    
    
    
    
    

    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 6] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
6. Micromobility 
    
   An example of handoff between two APs that belong to the same access 
   subnetwork is depicted in 2. 
    
    
                 |       +-+        +-----+                   +-----+  
                [] <-->  | | -------| AR5 |-------------------|     |  
                MN       +-+       /+-----+                  /| ANG |- 
                       AP/AR1     /                         / |     |  
                 |               /                         /  +-----+  
                 |       +-+    /                         /            
                 |       | |----                         /             
        (handoff)V       +-+                            /              
                       AP/AR2                          /               
                                                      /                
                         +-+        +-----+          /                 
                         | |--------| AR6 |----------                  
                         +-+       /+-----+                            
                       AP/AR3     / 
                                 / 
                         +-+    / 
                         | |---- 
                         +-+   
                       AP/AR4 
                      Figure 2: Handoff between APs. 
    
    
   The Handoff procedure takes the following steps: 
    
   The first four steps of the Handoff procedure are the same as those 
   of the Power-up case. The remaining steps are the following: 
    
   5. Exchange of RoutingUpdate/RoutingUpdateAck messages climbs up the 
      hierarchy levels, until the crossover AR (the AR that belongs 
      simultaneously to the old path and to the new path) is reached 
      (in the example above, node AR5). Now that the new routing path 
      is completely created, the old path must be deleted. This 
      procedure starts when the crossover AR sends a RoutingUpdate 
      message addressed to the MT through the old routing path. The AR 
      that receives the message realizes that the MT is no longer 
      accessible through it, updates its routing path by deleting the 
      entry that corresponds to the MT and replies with a 
      RoutingUpdateAck message. 
    
   6. Exchange of RoutingUpdate/RoutingUpdateAck messages goes down the 
      AR tree following the old path, until the Old AP is reached. At 
      each level, the routing table is updated by deleting the entry 
      relative to the MT. 
    
   In a normal shared media LAN, when a terminal has a packet destined 
   to an address within the same IP subnet (which is known through the 
   analysis of the IP address prefix), it tries to obtain the MAC 
    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 7] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
   address of the destination through an ARP request and send the 
   packet directly to it. In TIMIP, as the APs are also ARs, if the 
   destination is associated to a different AP, the ARP request will 
   never be answered. In order to prevent this situation, the terminal 
   is forced to send all packets to the IP Gateway of the local 
   subnetwork (which corresponds to the ANG) through the AP, which is 
   accomplished by setting the subnetwork mask configuration to 
   255.255.255.255. When the terminal sends an ARP request to obtain 
   the MAC address of the Gateway, the local AP answers with its own 
   MAC address. 
    
    
7. Macromobility 
    
   TIMIP relies on MIP to support macromobility. The ANG is the HA for 
   MNs whose home network is its TIMIP domain. As LMNs do not implement 
   MIP, the ANG implements all the needed functionality on their 
   behalf. On the other hand, when a foreign MN supports MIP, the ANG 
   acts as a Foreign Agent for the local TIMIP domain. 
    
7.1. Macromobility for LMNs 
    
   When a MT enters a TIMIP domain different from its current location, 
   the terminal is locally authenticated and a routing path is created 
   between the terminal and the ANG. Packets are then sent/received 
   to/from the outside through the ANG. If the home network of the MT 
   is a different MIP domain, its HA must be notified so that packets 
   can be correctly routed through an IP tunnel established from the HA 
   to the FA located at the ANG. 
    
   After consulting the registration information of the MT (namely the 
   IP address of the HA and the MIP capability), the ANG realizes that 
   it is a foreign MT and that it does not implement MIP. Consequently, 
   the ANG must act as a MIP proxy on behalf of the MT, generating all 
   MIP signaling as the MT would. Firstly it has to notify the HA about 
   the MTÆs new location and CoAddr by means of a MIP Registration 
   Request message, which requires authentication using the 
   authentication key between the MT and the HA. As the ANG does not 
   know this key, it is the MT that must sign the message. The ANG 
   sends the MT an AuthenticationRequest message containing <IP address 
   of the ANG, IP address of the HA, MIP Registration Request, 
   timestamp> authenticated by the ANG with MD5(K1, 
   AuthenticationRequest), where K1 is the authentication key between 
   the MT and ANG for this TIMIP domain. The MT finds K1 in the key 
   database based on the IP address of the ANG and obtains the 
   authentication key of his home network (K2) in the key database, 
   based on the IP address of the HA. It then answers with an 
   AuthenticationReply message containing <IP address of the ANG, IP 
   address of the HA, MD5(K2, MIP Registration Request), timestamp>. 
   This message is also authenticated by the terminal with MD5(K1, 
   AuthenticationReply). The ANG can now send a correctly authenticated 
   MIP Registration Request message to the HA adding the message digest 
   provided by the MT as a Mobile-Home Authentication Extension field. 
    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 8] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
    
   The HA answers with an authenticated MIP Registration Reply message, 
   which has a message digest MD5(K2, MIP Registration Reply) appended 
   as a Mobile-Home Authentication Extension field. In order to verify 
   the identity of the HA, the ANG must again rely on the MT. It sends 
   an AuthenticationRequest message to the MT, containing <IP address 
   of the ANG, IP address of the HA, MIP Registration Reply (except the 
   Mobile-Home Authentication Extension), timestamp>, authenticated 
   with MD5(K1, Authentication Request). The terminal answers with an 
   AuthenticationReply message containing <IP address of the ANG, IP 
   address of the HA, MD5(K2, MIP Registration Reply), timestamp>. If 
   the MD5 digest of the MIP Registration Reply provided by the MT 
   matches that present in the Mobile-Home Authentication Extension of 
   the Registration Reply message sent by the HA, the ANG can resume 
   communication with the HA. 
    
   After the communication with the HA is established, the ANG de-
   encapsulates the tunneled IP packets that come from the HA addressed 
   to the MT and forwards them normally to the MT according to the 
   routing path established in the AR tree. Packets generated by the MT 
   are routed normally according to the same procedures described above 
   for micromobility. 
    
   As already seen, all traffic that crosses the boundary of the TIMIP 
   domain must pass through the ANG, which is the IP Gateway to the 
   core network. Nevertheless, whenever an MT moves to a different 
   domain, the IP address of the ANG changes. In order to keep 
   consistency, the MT must change its IP Gateway configuration at each 
   handoff between TIMIP domains, otherwise the ARP requests to obtain 
   the MAC address of the IP Gateway would not be answered by the APs. 
   This inconvenience is avoided by configuring the MTs with a well-
   known ANG IP address recognized by all APs of all TIMIP domains. The 
   latter broadcast gratuitous ARP messages associating their own MAC 
   addresses with the well-known ANG IP address each time a terminal 
   performs an association. 
    
7.2. Macromobility for MIP terminals 
    
   When the MT supports MIP but belongs to a different domain, the ANG 
   plays the role of FA. The MT powers-on in the same way as legacy MTs 
   in the TIMIP domain. Once this is completed, the MIP signaling 
   starts. The ANG broadcasts RFC 1256 [7] Router Advertisement 
   messages periodically, specifying its IP address as the MIP CoAddr. 
   In order to haste the process, the MT can request the advertisement 
   by broadcasting a Router Solicitation message, which is then 
   forwarded by the AP to the ANG. 
    
   After the MT receives a Router Advertisement message, it notifies 
   its HA about the CoAddr through the ANG. The HA is then able to 
   forward the incoming packets to the CoAddr through an IP tunnel. The 
   ANG de-encapsulates the IP packets and forwards them normally to the 
   MT according to the routing path established in the AR tree. Packets 
   generated by the MT are also routed normally within the TIMIP 
    
   Estrela                                                    [Page 9] 
   Internet-draft        Terminal Independent               March 2002 
                        Mobility for IP (TIMIP) 
    
   domain. Handoff between APs within the foreign TIMIP domain are 
   dealt with TIMIP micromobility procedures only (see above) as the FA 
   is always the same (i.e. the ANG).  
   It should be noted that in this case it is the MT itself that 
   authenticates the MIP messages when communicating with the HA. 
 
    
8. References 
    
   1  Grilo A., Estrela P., Nunes M., Terminal Independent Mobility for 
      IP (TIMIP)ö, IEEE Communications, Vol. 39 N¦12, December 2001. 
    
   2  Perkins C. (Editor), "IP Mobility Support", RFC 2002, IETF, 
      October 1996.  
    
   3  A. Campbell et al, ôDesign, Implementation and Evaluation of 
      Cellular IPö, IEEE Personal Communications, Vol. 7 N¦4, August 
      2000. 
    
   4  R. Ramjee et al, ôIP-Based Access Network Infrastructure for 
      Next-Generation Wireless Data Networksö, IEEE Personal 
      Communications, Vol. 7 N¦4, August 2000. 
 
   5  Mills D. ôNetwork Time Protocol (Version 3), Specification, 
      Implementation and Analysisö, RFC 1305, IETF, March 1992.  
    
   6  Rivest R., ôThe MD5 Message-Digest Algorithmö, RFC 1321, IETF, 
      April 1992. 
    
   7  Deering S. (Editor), ôICMP Router Discovery Messagesö, RFC 1256, 
      IETF, September 1991. 
    
9. Author's Addresses 
    
   Pedro Estrela 
   INESC 
   Rua Alves Redol, N.9         Phone:  +351-213100324 
   1000 Lisboa, Portugal        Email:  pedro.estrela@inesc.pt 
    
   Antnio Grilo 
   INESC 
   Rua Alves Redol, N.9         Phone:  +351-213100226 
   1000 Lisboa, Portugal        Email:  amg@cris.inesc.pt 
    
   Teresa Vazƒo 
   INESC 
   Rua Alves Redol, N.9         Phone:  +351-213100286 
   1000 Lisboa, Portugal        Email:  teresa.vazao@inesc.pt 
    
   Mßrio Nunes 
   INESC 
   Rua Alves Redol, N.9         Phone:  +351-213100256 
   1000 Lisboa, Portugal        Email:  msn@inesc.pt 
    
   Estrela                                                   [Page 10] 